docs(recipes): add role-based access recipe (#3241)
cube-js/cube.js: docs/content/Examples-Tutorials-Recipes/Role-based-access.md

---

> title: Role Based Access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Role-Based Access
```

permalink: /recipes/role-based-access
category: Examples & Tutorials
subCategory: Access control
menuOrder: 1
---

## Use case

> We might want to manage access to different data depending on the user's role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to manage user access to different data depending on their role.
```

> In the recipe below, a user with the `operator` role can view only processing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the recipe below, a user with the `operator` role can only view processing
```

> orders from a shop, and a `manager` can view only shipped and completed orders.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
orders from a shop and a `manager` can only view shipped and completed orders.
```

## Data schema

> To implement the role-based access, we will use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To implement role-based access, we will use a
```

[JSON Web Token](https://cube.dev/docs/security) with role information in the
payload, and the

> [queryRewrite](https://cube.dev/docs/security/context#using-query-rewrite) to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[queryRewrite](https://cube.dev/docs/security/context#using-query-rewrite) extension point to
```

manage data access.

> Let's add the role verify in the cube.js file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's add the role verification in the cube.js file.
```

```javascript
module.exports = {
  queryRewrite: (query, { securityContext }) => {
    if (!securityContext.role) {
      throw new Error('No role found in Security Context!');
    }

    if (securityContext.role == 'manager') {
      query.filters.push({
        member: 'Orders.status',
        operator: 'equals',
        values: ['shipped', 'completed'],
      });
    }

    if (securityContext.role == 'operator') {
      query.filters.push({
        member: 'Orders.status',
        operator: 'equals',
        values: ['processing'],
      });
    }

    return query;
  },
};
```

## Query

> To get the number of orders as manager and operator, we will send two identical

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get the number of orders as a manager or operator, we will send two identical
```

-G -s --data-urlencode "query={"dimensions": ["Orders.status"], "timeDimensions": [], "order": {"Orders.count": "desc"}, "measures": ["Orders.count"],"filters": []}"
```

```javascript
//operator
curl cube:4000/cubejs-api/v1/load \
-H "Authorization: eeyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJyb2xlIjoib3BlcmF0b3IiLCJpYXQiOjE2Mjg3NDUwNDUsImV4cCI6MTgwMTU0NTA0NX0.VErb2t7Bc43ryRwaOiEgXuU5KiolCT-69eI_i2pRq4o" \
-G -s --data-urlencode "query={"dimensions": ["Orders.status"], "timeDimensions": [], "order": {"Orders.count": "desc"}, "measures": ["Orders.count"],"filters": []}"
```

## Result

We have received different data depending on the user's role.

```javascript
// manager
[
  {
    'Orders.status': 'completed',
    'Orders.count': '3346',
  },
  {
    'Orders.status': 'shipped',
    'Orders.count': '3300',
  },
];
```

```javascript
// operator
[
  {
    'Orders.status': 'processing',
    'Orders.count': '3354',
  },
];
```

## Source

Please check out the full source code [here](https://github.com/cube-js/cube.js/tree/master/recipes/role-based-access). It is

> self-contained code, so if you execute `docker-compose up` command in the folder

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
self-contained code, so if you execute the `docker-compose up` command in the folder
```

> with the source code, you'll see the query execution result's console log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the source code, you'll see the result from the query execution in the console.
```

> ## Source
> 
> Please check out the full source code [here](https://github.com/cube-js/cube.js/tree/master/recipes/role-based-access). It is
> self-contained code, so if you execute the `docker-compose up` command in the folder
> with the source code, you'll see the result from the query execution in the console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Source code

Please feel free to check out the [full source code](https://github.com/cube-js/cube.js/tree/master/recipes/role-based-access)
or run it with the `docker-compose up` command.
You'll see the result, including queried data, in the console.
```

---
title: Role-Based Access
permalink: /recipes/role-based-access
category: Examples & Tutorials
subCategory: Access control
menuOrder: 1
---

## Use case

We want to manage user access to different data depending on their role. In the
recipe below, a user with the `operator` role can only view processing orders
from a shop and a `manager` can only view shipped and completed orders.

> ## Data schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuration
```

To implement role-based access, we will use a
[JSON Web Token](https://cube.dev/docs/security) with role information in the
payload, and the

> [queryRewrite](https://cube.dev/docs/security/context#using-query-rewrite)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`queryRewrite`](https://cube.dev/docs/security/context#using-query-rewrite)
```

Reviewer: Good catch, @hassankhan! ❤️

extension point to manage data access.

> Let's add the role verification in the cube.js file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's add the role verification in the `cube.js` file.
```

```javascript
module.exports = {
  queryRewrite: (query, { securityContext }) => {
    if (!securityContext.role) {
      throw new Error('No role found in Security Context!');
    }

    if (securityContext.role == 'manager') {
      query.filters.push({
        member: 'Orders.status',
        operator: 'equals',
        values: ['shipped', 'completed'],
      });
    }

    if (securityContext.role == 'operator') {
      query.filters.push({
        member: 'Orders.status',
        operator: 'equals',
        values: ['processing'],
      });
    }

    return query;
  },
};
```

## Query

To get the number of orders as a manager or operator, we will send two identical

> requests with different authorization tokens.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
requests with different JWTs:
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer 3: Technically speaking, this code block should be `bash`

Author: Exactly! Thanks!

> // manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Manager
```

curl cube:4000/cubejs-api/v1/load \
-H "Authorization: eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJyb2xlIjoibWFuYWdlciIsImlhdCI6MTYyODc0NTAxMSwiZXhwIjoxODAxNTQ1MDExfQ.1cOAjRHhrFKD7Tg3g57ppVm5nX4eI0zSk8JMbinfzTk" \
-G -s --data-urlencode "query={"dimensions": ["Orders.status"], "timeDimensions": [], "order": {"Orders.count": "desc"}, "measures": ["Orders.count"],"filters": []}"
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer 3: Ditto

> //operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Operator
```

curl cube:4000/cubejs-api/v1/load \
-H "Authorization: eeyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJyb2xlIjoib3BlcmF0b3IiLCJpYXQiOjE2Mjg3NDUwNDUsImV4cCI6MTgwMTU0NTA0NX0.VErb2t7Bc43ryRwaOiEgXuU5KiolCT-69eI_i2pRq4o" \
-G -s --data-urlencode "query={"dimensions": ["Orders.status"], "timeDimensions": [], "order": {"Orders.count": "desc"}, "measures": ["Orders.count"],"filters": []}"
```

## Result

We have received different data depending on the user's role.

> ```javascript

Reviewer: It looks more like `json` rather than `javascript`, If we support `json` syntax highlighting in our docs, I'd stick with it.

> // manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Manager
```

[
  {
    'Orders.status': 'completed',
    'Orders.count': '3346',
  },
  {
    'Orders.status': 'shipped',
    'Orders.count': '3300',
  },

> ];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
]
```

```

```javascript

> // operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Operator
```

[
  {
    'Orders.status': 'processing',
    'Orders.count': '3354',
  },

> ];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
]
```

```

## Source code

Please feel free to check out the

> [full source code](https://github.com/cube-js/cube.js/tree/master/recipes/role-based-access)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[full source code](https://github.com/cube-js/cube.js/tree/master/examples/recipes/role-based-access)
```
